Barstools and chip docs (#446)
ucb-bar/chipyard: docs/Tools/Barstools.rst

This is necessary to facilitate post-synthesis and post-place-and-route simulation, as the module names in the RTL and gate-level verilog files would collide.
Simulations after you the design goes through a VLSI flow will use the verilog netlist generated from the flow and will need an untouched test harness to drive it.
Separating these components into separate files makes this straightforward.
Without the separation the file that included the test harness would also redefine the DUT which is often disallowed in simulation tools.
To do this, there is a FIRRTL ``App`` in :ref:`Barstools` called ``GenerateTopAndHarness``, which runs the appropriate transforms to elaborate the modules separately.
This also renames modules in the test harness so that any modules that are instantiated in both the test harness and the chip are uniquified.

.. Note:: For VLSI projects, this ``App`` is run instead of the normal FIRRTL ``App`` to elaborate Verilog.

Macro Description Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The SRAM technology macros and IO cells are described in a json format called Macro Description Format (MDF).
MDF is specialized for each type of macro it supports.

> The specialization is defined in their respective sections.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what this means

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are planning on building a real chip, it is likely that you will plan on using some amount of static random access memory, or SRAM.
SRAM macros offer superior storage density over flip-flop arrays at the cost of restricting the number of read or write transactions that can happen in a cycle.
Unlike in Verilog, these types of sequential memory elements are first-class primitives in Chisel and FIRRTL (``SeqMem`` elements).
This allows Chisel designs to contain abstract instantiations of sequential memory elements without knowing the underlying implementation or process technology.

Modern CAD tools typically cannot synthesize SRAMs from a high-level RTL description.
This, unfortunately, requires the designer to include the SRAM instantiation in the source RTL, which removes its process portability.
In Verilog-entry designs, it is possible to create a layer of abstraction that allows a new process technology to implement a specific sequential memory block in a wrapper module.
However, this method can be fragile and laborious.

The FIRRTL compiler contains a transformation to replace the ``SeqMem`` primitives called ``ReplSeqMem``.

> This simply converts all ``SeqMem`` instances above a size threshold into external module references.

Reviewer 2: Might want to clarify what an "external module reference" is.

Author: Sure.

A list of unique SRAM configurations is output to a ``.conf`` file by FIRRTL, which is used to map technology SRAMs.
Without this transform, FIRRTL will map all ``SeqMem`` s to flip-flop arrays with equivalent behavior.

> With very high capacity ``SeqMem`` s, this may lead to a design that is difficult to route.

Reviewer 2: I feel like you can combine the last two sentences into one just to be very explicit that high-capacity flop arrays are prone to issues.

Author: Ok

The ``.conf`` file is consumed by a tool called MacroCompiler, which is part of the :ref:`Barstools` scala package.
MacroCompiler is also passed an ``.mdf`` file that describes the available list of technology SRAMs or the capabilities of the SRAM compiler, if one is provided by the foundry.

> Using a user-customizable cost function, MacroCompiler will select the SRAMs that are the best fit for each dimensionality in the ``.conf`` file.

Reviewer 3: What is the default cost function and how does one specify a custom cost function?

Author: The default is specified below and I now describe how to override it.

> Using a user-customizable cost function, MacroCompiler will select the SRAMs that are the best fit for each dimensionality in the ``.conf`` file.

Reviewer: Does it say anywhere how to customize the cost function?

Author: Added.

This may include overprovisioning (e.g. using a 64x1024 SRAM for a requested 60x1024, if the latter is not available) or arraying.
Arraying can be done in both width and depth, as well as to solve masking constraints.
For example, a 128x2048 array could be composed of four 64x1024 arrays, with two macros in parallel to create two 128x1024 virtual SRAMs which are combinationally muxed to add depth.
If this macro requires byte-granularity write masking, but no technology SRAMs support masking, then the tool may choose to use thirty-two 8x1024 arrays in a similar configuration.

> For information on writing ``.mdf`` files, look at `MDF on github <https://github.com/ucb-bar/plsi-mdf>`__.

Reviewer: I went to that link, but I couldn't find anywhere in that repo information about writing mdf files

Author: I wrote a new section that describes the format.

The output of MacroCompiler is a Verilog file containing modules that wrap the technology SRAMs into the specified interface names from the ``.conf``.

> If the technology supports an SRAM compiler, then MacroCompiler will also emit HammerIR that can be passed to Hammer to run the compiler itself and generate design collateral.

Reviewer 2: Maybe 1 phrase on what an SRAM compiler means (i.e. creates arbitrary sized SRAMs...)

Reviewer 3: Not really... SRAM compiler basically just means that the foundry has a tool that takes in something (e.g. a string denoting which SRAM you want) and spits out all the collateral you need. One still needs to write an `.mdf` that spans the allowable range of SRAMs. Perhaps this can be made clearer (I guess that's "forthcoming").

Reviewer 2: Clearly my understanding was incorrect. So having more explanation would be nice!

Author: I described MDF in a new commit.
I think Abe's understanding isn't far off, its just not arbitrary.

I'll try to clarify this a bit anyways.

Documentation for SRAM compilers is forthcoming.

MacroCompiler Options
+++++++++++++++++++++
Macrocompiler accepts many command-line paramters which affect how it maps ``SeqMem`` s to technology specific macros.
This highest level option ``--mode`` specifies in general how MacroCompiler should map the input ``SeqMem`` s to technology macros.
The ``strict`` value forces MacroCompiler to map all memories to technology macros and error if it is unable to do so.
The ``synflops`` value forces MacroCompiler to map all memories to flip flops.
The ``compileandsynflops`` value instructs MacroCompiler to use the technology compiler to determine sizes of technology macros used but to then create mock versions of these macros with flip flops.
The ``fallbacksynflops`` value causes MacroCompiler to compile all possible memories to technology macros but when unable to do so to use flip flops to implement the remaining memories.

> The final and default value, ``compileavailble``, instructs MacroCompiler to compile all memories to the technology macros and do nothing if it is unable to map them.

Reviewer 3: `compileavailble`: typo?

Author: Thanks.

Most of the rest of the options are used to control where different inputs and outputs are expected and produced.
The option ``--macro-conf`` is the file that contains the set of input ``SeqMem`` configuartions to map in the ``.conf`` format described above.

> The option ``--macor-mdf`` also describes the input ``SeqMem`` s but is instead in the ``.mdf`` format.

Reviewer 3: also typo?

Author: Thanks

This option is not needed if ``--use-compiler`` is not specified.
This file can then be passed to HAMMER to have it run the technology compiler producing the associated macro collateral.
The ``--cost-func`` option allows the user to specify a different cost function for the mapping task.
Because the mapping of memories is a multi-dimensional space spanning performance, power, and area, the cost function setting of MacroCompiler allows the user to tune the mapping to their preference.
The default option is a reasonable heurstic that attempts to minimize the number of technology macros instantiated per ``SeqMem`` without wasting too many memory bits.
The ``--cost-param`` option allows the user to specify parameters to pass to the cost function if the cost function supports that.
The ``--force-synflops [mem]`` options allows the user to override any heuristics in MacroCompiler and force it to map the given memory to flip-flops.
Likewise, the ``--force-compile [mem]`` option allows the user to force MacroCompiler to map the given ``mem`` to a technology macro.

> 

Reviewer 3: Would it be useful to also list the short-form options (e.g. `-u` instead of `--use-compiler`)?

Author: I thought this would be unnecessary.

> Separating the top module from the test harness

Reviewer 2: "Separating the Top module from the TestHarness module"

Author: Fixed

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Unlike the FireSim and Software simulation flows, we need to separate the test harness and the chip (a.k.a. DUT) into separate files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the FireSim and Software simulation flows, a VLSI flow needs to separate the test harness and the chip (a.k.a. DUT) into separate files.
```

Author: Fixed.

> This is necessary to facilitate post-synthesis and post-place-and-route simulation, as the module names in the RTL and gate-level verilog files would collide.

Reviewer: Could you give an example here?

Author: Fixed.

> To do this, there is a FIRRTL ``App`` in :ref:`Barstools` called ``GenerateTopAndHarness``, which runs the appropriate transforms to elaborate the modules separately.

Reviewer: Is a FIRRTL ``App`` defined anywhere else in the docs?

Author: It's actually a scala thing. Just means there is a main method so you can call it directly.
This is going away with the next release so I don't want to spend to much time describing scala stuff.

This also renames modules in the test harness so that any modules that are instantiated in both the test harness and the chip are uniquified.

.. Note:: For VLSI projects, this ``App`` is run instead of the normal FIRRTL ``App`` to elaborate Verilog.

Mapping technology IO cells
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Like technology SRAMs, IO cells are almost always included in digital ASIC designs to allow pin configurability, increase the voltage level of the IO signal, and provide ESD protection.
Unlike SRAMs, there is no corresponding primitive in Chisel or FIRRTL.
However, this problem can be solved similarly to ``SeqMem``s by leveraging the strong typing available in these scala-based tools.
We are actively developing a FIRRTL transform that will automatically configure, map, and connect technology IO cells.
Stay tuned for more information!

In the meantime, it is recommended that you instantiate the IO cells in your Chisel design.

> This, unfortunately, breaks the process-agnostic RTL abstraction, so it is recommended that inclusion of these cells be configurable using the ``rocket-chip`` parameterization system.

Reviewer: example?

Author: Fixed.

> When simulating chip-specific deisgns, it is important to include the IO cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When simulating chip-specific designs, it is important to include the IO cells.
```

Author: Fixed
